

INPUT GUIDE FOR PROGRAM PANIN                                \panin\input.txt

A Program for Preparing Input Files for PanAir (A502)
by Ralph L. Carmichael

Introduction

The program referred to as A502 is a pilot version of the production
computer code known as PANAIR. 
Both PANAIR and A502 were developed
by the Boeing Company under contract to the NASA Ames Research
Center. These programs solve for the fluid flow about an arbitrary
configuration at subsonic or supersonic speeds, using linearized
potential flow theory.
The A502 code was never intended for wide distribution and
only modest efforts were made to document the input file format
and explain the usage of the program. Recent developments have led
to the more widespread use of A502 and the program must become
available to a greater number of users. 
The purpose of this paper
and the computer program it describes is to make the A502 version
of PanAir accessable to a users in a simple fashion.

A502 Input Format
The input to A502 is described in Reference 1. The input data is
organized in specific columns. Editing an input file is a rather
error-prone process. The PANIN program was written to enable a
user to select the flow properties and all other program options by
editing a short free-format file called an auxiliary file. One entry
in the auxiliary file is the name of a file that contains the
geometrical information. The format of this file is that of the NASA
standard for wireframe geometry as described in reference 2.
This file is usually referred to as a WGS
file, standing for Wireframe Geometry Standard. The program
reads the various items of control information from the auxiliary
file and combines this information with the panel geometry in the
WGS file to produce a combined file that is a properly formatted
input file for PanAir.

Preparing the WGS File
The first and most difficult part of preparing a case for PANAIR or
any panel code is the definition of the surface geometry as a set of
quadrilateral panels. A variety of techniques exist for the creation
of this data. A program call MAKEWGS in this collection is available
for definition of simple geometries.
Those familiar with the
geometry programs in use at Langley may find it preferable to use
QUICK or GEMPAK to produce inputs. 
The ultimate solution lies in the use of a Computer-Aided-Design (CAD)
system that has a wireframe output option.
There is a program A502WGS that will convert A502 input decks to WGS.



The PanIn command file
All input to PanAir other than the geometry definition or off-body
xyz-points is contained in the
auxiliary file.    **** REWRITE THAT ****


Each records in the auxiliary file starts with a key word.
The key word may be upper or lower case and may be preceeded by blanks.
The key word is usually followed on the same record
with a numeric value which is the value of the variable described by
the key word.
For some key words, a series of numerical values follows while for
others no values are required.
Comments may be added to a record after the necessary data.
Comments may be added after the numeric value for most of the keywords.



Currently the keywords are:
ABUTPR 
ALPC    compressibility angle of attack, degrees
ALPHA   list of angles of attack  (degrees) (max of 4) 
AVERAGE if any networks are modelled as thin surfaces they are 
        listed on this record
BETA    list of angles of sideslip (degrees) (max of 4)
BETC    compressibility angle of sideslip 
BOUN    the boundary conditions to be applied to each network. 
        This will be a list of KT values, one for each network. 
        However, if any network has KT=30, the number 30 must be followed 
        by 4 additional boundary condition inputs. A value of -18 is used for
        the special case of fuselage base wake, or wakes that abut other wakes.

BWAKE   followed by 3 numbers to define a body edge wake network.
        This is also used for wakes attached to upstream wakes.
        The first is the network to which the wake is attached; the second is the 
        edge number to which it is attached; third is the x-coor of downstream edge. 
CBAR    length of the reference chord 
CHECK   =0 for a full run; =1 to stop after computing abutments. 
CUTS    name of a file that has a list of plane definitions
        each record has 6 numbers, 3 for point, 3 for normal
EAT     abutment tolerance 
FORCE   list of networks to be used for calculation of configuration
        force and moment summary. If this record is not present, the
        default is to use all thnetworks that have kt=1 boundary conditions.
GRID    definition of an off-body grid. There must be 9 numbers 
        following the keyword GRID and they must be on the same record. 
        The nine items are (xorigin, yorigin, zorigin), (dx,dy,dz), and 
        (nx,ny,nz). 
HMIN    min step size for streamlines 
HMAX    max step size for streamlines 
ISINGS  =1 to print singularity data; =0 to suppress 
IGEOIN  =0 to print network geometry before liberalized abutment mods 
        =-1 to suppress this printout
IGEOUT  =0 to NOT print network geometry after liberalized abutment mods 
        =1 to print this information
IGEOMP  =1 to print geometry diagnostic data; =0 to suppress 
ISINGP  =1 to print singularity spline data; =0 to suppress 
ICONTP  =1 to print control point loc, normals; =0 to suppress 
        =2 to print upper surface normal only
IBCONP  =1 to print boundary condition diagnostic data; =0 to suppress 
IEDGEP  =1 to print edge-matching diagnostic data; =0 to suppress 
IPRAIC  =1 to print control point sequence number; =0 to suppress 
IOUTPR  =-1 to omit flow parameter output
        =0  to output 48 flow parameters
        =1  to output 12 flow parameters
IFMCPR  =-1 to omit network force and moment output
        =0  to output network force,moment summary per col, per net, accum
        =1  to output network force,moment summary per net and accumulation
IGNORE  if any networks are not to be included in the force and moment 
        calculations, they are listed on this record. 
IVCORR  =1 to apply the McLean velocity correction 
        =2 to apply the Boctor velocity correction 
        =0 to make no corrections
MACH    free stream Mach Number  
MAXSTREAM       maximum number of points along any single streamline (default 100)
MNSWITCH        (may also be spelled MNSWCH) any networks that should have rows
                and columns interchanged are listed on this record
NEXDGN  =1 to print edge control point data; =0 to suppress 
NOF     do not add trailing filaments for Trefftz plane drag analysis
OFFNETS list of networks used for calculation of off-body velocities or 
        streamlines. Default is to use all networks. 

PEA     [not implemented yet]

PRECISION       number of decimals printed in all fields of the a502 input
        file produced by this program.
RESTART if the job has been run previously with a SAVE and there are 
        files on the CSF archive, the job may be restarted without 
        recomputation of the aerodynamic matrix.
        =1 if additional angles of attack or sideslip are to be done 
        =2 if the same angles are used 
SPAN    reference span 
SREF    reference area 
STREAM  name of a file that has a list of (x,y,z) (dx,dy,dz) triples
        six numbers per record
SYMM    =0 for asymmetric configuration; =1 for symmetric 
TITLE1  a title that appears on the printed output 
TITLE2  second line of the title 
UPSTREAM        streamlines go upstream instead of downstream.
WAKE    followed by 3 numbers to define a trailing edge wake network.
        The first is the network to which the wake is attached; the second is the 
        edge number to which it is attached; third is the x-coor of downstream edge. 
WGS     name of the WGS file 
XREF    x-coordinate of the moment reference point 
XYZ     name of a file which has a list of (x,y,z) triples, defining the 
        off-body points at which velocities are to be computed. 
        one triple per record. 
YREF    y-coordinate of the moment reference point 
ZREF    z-coordinate of the moment reference point 
        no changes in angles or Mach number, this commands a restart. 
        The principal use is for off-body points. 


Default Values
In order to make the creation of this auxiliary file as simple as
possible, all of the keywords have preset defaults which are used if
the user does not supply a value. For many of the items, the default
value will be the desired value and the auxiliary file can be quite
short. The following items all have default values of 0: MACH, XREF,
YREF, ZREF, ALPC, BETC, ALPHA, BETA, ISINGS, IGEOMP, ISINGP, ICONTP,
IBCONT, IEDGEP, IPRAIC, NEXDGN, IOUTPR, IFMCPR, IVCORR, IGEOIN, IGEOUT,
CHECK. The quantities SREF, CBAR, SPAN, and SYMM have default values of
1.0 and MAXSTREAM has a default value of 100.
HMIN defaults to 0.1 anf HMAX to 0.5.
TIME has a default value of 100 and NAME is given the string
"A502". The keywords MNSWITCH, FORCE, IGNORE, and AVERAGE refer to
lists of network numbers. If any of these are not specified, the list
is taken to have no members. If XYZ or STREAM is not included in the
auxiliary file, then no off-body points or streamlines will be
computed.



Putting It All Together
Once the WGS geometry file and the auxiliary file have been created
and stored, the PanAir input file is created by invoking the program
panin.

After the panin program has completed execution, two files 
have been produced. These files take their names from the data in the
NAME record in the auxiliary file with extensions of .sh and .in.
For example, if the record in the auxiliary file is NAME mycase, then
the two files produced are mycase.in and mycase.sh.
The .in file is the a502 input data.

An Example
The dataset shown here is a sample case

NAME owra45
TIME 550
WGS owra45b.wgs    ( version with modified nose )
TITLE1 Oblique Wing Research Airplane    Ames 86 concept (250 sq. ft)
TITLE2  Sweep=45
CHECK 0
symm 0             ( no symmetry )
ioutpr -1          ( do not print surface pressures )
ifmcpr 1           ( short print )
cbar 5.34
span 50
sref 250           ( small wing; new one has 300 )
xref 37.292
mach 0.9
alpc 5             ( average value for alpha values )
alpha 4 5 6
eat  0.0001
ignore 7 8 9 10
average 23 24 25 26 27 31 32
BOUN
1 1 1 1 1 1
5 5 5 5
1 1 1 1 1 1
18 18 18 18 18 18
2 2
2 2 2
18 18 18
2 2
18 18 18 18 18 18 18 18

This job expects to find a file called owra45b.wgs in the current 
directory.
The wgs file should contain 40 networks.
Networks 7-10 are base nets and 17-22, 28-30, and 33-40 are trailing edge
wake nets.
Nets 23-27 and 31-32 are surfaces of zero thickness and their forces
and moments are computed from the delta-Cp across the panel.
Two files named owra45.sh and owra45.in will be produced in the current
directory.


Disclaimer
Although a considerable effort has been expended in making the program
free of errors or ommisions, the user should inspect the input
file and script carefully. There are many problems in forcing data to fit
the fixed field format and inadvertent roundoff may result. The PRECISION
keyword can be helpful, but there are many potential sources of error.
The principal problem area is overflow of an output field when one is
trying to keep the geometric accuracy high by printing many decimals.
Two popular places for this error to occur are the x-coordinates of the
trailing edges of wakes and the value of reference area.
It is usually useful to scan the PanAir input file for asterisk characters.

There are many options in the PanAir input file and it would be virtually
immpossible to incorporate all of them in this program. For example, in
PanAir you can select different reference lengths for yawing momemt
and rolling moment. PanIn simply asks for SPAN. And there are lots more.


References

1. Saaris, Gary A., "A502F User's Guide -- PAN AIR Technology
Program for Solving Problems of Potential Flow about Arbitrary Configurations,"  
Boeing Document D6-53818, June 1988 (Rev A).

2. Craidon, Charlotte B., "LaWGS - A Description of the Langley 
Wireframe Geometry Standard Format," NASA Technical Memorandum 85767, Feb 1985.

