ARC-11398
PANAIR- PREDICTING SUBSONIC OR SUPERSONIC LINEAR POTENTIAL FLOWS
ABOUT ARBITRARY CONFIGURATIONS USING A HIGHER
ORDER PANEL METHOD (CDC VERSION)

PANAIR (an abbreviation for "panel aerodynamics") is a state-of-the-art
system of computer programs developed to predict inviscid subsonic and
supersonic flows about an arbitrary configuration by means of a higher
order panel method.  Generally speaking, a panel method solves a linear
partial differential equation numerically by approximating the
configuration surface by a set of panels on which unknown "singularity
strengths" are defined, imposing boundary conditions at a discrete set
of points, and thereby generating a system of linear equations relating
the unknown singularity strengths.  These equations are solved for the
singularity strengths which provide information on the properties of
the flow.  PANAIR differs from earlier panel methods by employing a
"higher order" panel method; that is, the singularity strengths are not
constant on each panel.  This is necessitated by the more stringent
requirements of supersonic problem. The potential for numerical error
is greatly reduced in the PANAIR program by requiring the singularity
strength to be continuous.  It is also this "higher order" attribute
which allows PANAIR to be used to analyze flow about arbitrary
configurations.  PANAIR can handle the simple configurations considered
in the preliminary design phase and later serve as the "analytical
wind tunnel" which can analyze the flow about the final detailed,
complex configurations.

The PANAIR system includes the following capabilities: the ability to
handle, within the limitations of linear potential flow theory,
completely arbitrary configurations, using either exact or linearized
boundary conditions; the ability to handle asymmetric configurations
as well as those with one or two planes of symmetry; the ability to
handle symmetric configurations in either symmetric or asymmetric flow;
the ability to superimpose an incremental velocity on the freestream,
either locally or globally, in order to simulate effects such as a
rotational motion, differing angles of attack for different portions of
a configuration, or a propeller slipstream; the ability to calculate
pressures, forces, and moments using a variety of pressure formulas
(such as isentropic, linear, etc.), including the forces and moments
due to flow through the surface; the ability to calculate leading edge
and side edge thrust forces and moments for thin configurations; and
the ability to perform the non-iterative design of a configuration, a
process in which a desired pressure or tangential velocity distribution
is specified and PANAIR determines the "residual" normal flow through
the surface required to obtain the desired distribution.

The PANAIR code was designed with ease of use foremost in mind.  Most
problems can be modeled with a minimum of user input.  In general,
the aircraft surface is partitioned into several networks of surface
grid points, such as a forebody network, a wing network, and so forth.
The coordinates of the input grid points must be computed and entered
by the user; PANAIR does not generate grid point coordinates.
PANAIR connects the grid points in each network with piecewise flat
panels.  The user also supplies information concerning the free-stream
onset flow, the angle of attack, and the angle of sideslip.  Numerous
flow quantities are computed at points on the vehicle surface and at
points in space.  These include pressure coefficients, total and
perturbation values of velocity and mass flux components, total and
perturbation potential, local Mach number, and vacuum pressure
coefficient.  The pressure coefficients on individual panels are
fitted with two-dimensional quadratic splines and integrated to obtain
the six components of force and the moment coefficients.  These
coefficients may be output for each panel, for columns of panels, for
each network, or for any combination of networks.  The user has
extensive control over the type and quantity of data that is output
during a PANAIR analysis.

The PANAIR system includes advanced software technology as well as
advanced engineering technology.  It has been developed in accordance
with the Systematic Software Development Methodology, an approach that
emphasizes modular, structured software.  The separate "modules" of
the PANAIR system communicate with each other only through a "data base"
of information residing on disk storage.  A module execution control
system and data management system ensure that the PANAIR modules
execute and communicate in the proper manner.  This software design
lends itself to easy maintenance since changes in one module affect
the other modules in a clearly identifiable manner.

The PANAIR program product is available by license for a period of 10
years to approved licensees.  The licensed program product delivered
includes one complete set of supporting documentation; however,
additional copies of the documentation may be purchased separately
at any time according to the price schedule shown.
The CDC version of the PANAIR system is written in FORTRAN IV and
ASSEMBLER for batch execution and has been successfully installed
and executed in the following environments: CDC CYBER 175 under
NOS 1.3 and NOS 1.4, CDC 7600 under SCOPE 2.1.3 and SCOPE 2.1.4,
and CDC CYBER 750, 760 under NOS/BE.  The largest program "module"
in the PANAIR system has a central memory requirement of approximately
145K (octal) of 60 bit words.  The CRAY version of the PANAIR system
is written in FORTRAN and ASSEMBLER for the CRAY 1-S, 1-M, and X-MP,
operating under COS.  The CDC version of the PANAIR system was
developed in 1980.  The CRAY version was last updated in 1987.

COSMIC, and the COSMIC logo are registered trademarks of the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. All other brands and 
product names are the trademarks of their respective holders.

LANGUAGE: FORTRAN IV(99%),  ASSEMBLER(1%)

MACHINE REQUIREMENTS: CDC CYBER 170 Series

PROGRAM SIZE: Approximately 288957 source statements

DISTRIBUTION MEDIA: 9 Track 1600 BPI CDC System Internal Format Magnetic Tape

DOMESTIC - DOCUMENTATION PRICE $303.00 PROGRAM LICENSE $1500.00
(Program Available By License Agreement Only)
